+++
title = 'Automation'
weight = 1
date = 2024-01-23T11:28:13+01:00
draft = true
+++

## Introduction

The advent of cloud computing has introduced a transformative approach to managing IT resources, fostering a new era of efficiency, agility, and innovation. This chapter explores  three pillars that underpin automation in cloud infrastructure:

- Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
- Immutable Infrastructure
- Provisioning Automation.

## Infrastructure as Code (IaC)

Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is a key practice in cloud computing that involves managing and provisioning computing infrastructure through machine-readable definition files, rather than physical hardware configuration or interactive configuration tools. This paradigm shift means that the same rigor and discipline applied to application code can now be applied to the infrastructure.

The benefits of IaC are manifold. It enables developers and operations teams to automatically manage, monitor, and provision resources through code, which is version controlled, allowing for consistency, repeatability, and rapid deployment. IaC reduces the potential for human error during setup and configuration, ensures that the deployment process is repeatable and standardized, and simplifies the management of infrastructure across various environments.

## Immutable Infrastructure

Immutable Infrastructure is a model where components are replaced rather than changed. Once a piece of infrastructure is deployed, it is never modified; if changes are needed, a new piece of infrastructure is created and replaced as a whole. This concept complements IaC and aligns with the microservices architecture approach.

The immutable approach has several advantages. It eradicates configuration drift which is the divergence of environments due to manual changes and updates. By treating infrastructure components as disposable, systems become more predictable, scalable, and secure. Rollbacks are easier as well since one can simply revert to a previous version of the infrastructure definition.

## Provisioning Automation

Provisioning automation is about streamlining the process of managing the resources. By automating the provisioning processes, organizations can deploy infrastructure and applications quickly and consistently. This facet of cloud computing is critical for managing large-scale systems and for implementing continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) pipelines.

Automated provisioning tools work in conjunction with IaC and immutable infrastructure to create a highly efficient workflow. This enables quick setup of development, testing, and production environments that are identical, thereby reducing the "works on my machine" syndrome and improving the quality and reliability of deployments.

## Conclusion

The combination of IaC, Immutable Infrastructure, and Provisioning Automation represents a modern approach to IT infrastructure management. These practices enable organizations to build robust, secure, and highly available systems while significantly reducing the operational overhead and risk of human error.